MenakBERT - Hebrew Diacriticizer 
Ido Cohen, Jacob Gidron, Idan Pinto 
Tel Aviv University 
{its.ido, jacob.o.gidron, idan.pinto3}@gmail.com,  
 
  
 
Abstract 
Diacritical marks in the Hebrew language 
give words their vocalized form. The task of 
adding diacritical marks to plain Hebrew text 
is still dominated by a system that relies 
heavily on human-curated resources. Recent 
models trained on diacritized Hebrew texts 
still present a gap in performance. We use a 
recently developed char-based PLM to 
narrowly bridge this gap. Presenting 
MenakBERT, a character level transformer 
pretrained on Hebrew text and fine-tuned to 
produce diacritical marks for Hebrew 
sentences. We continue to show how fine-
tuning a model for diacritizing transfers to a 
task such as part of speech tagging. 
1 Introduction 
Semitic languages use diacritical marks and 
vowels to give words their vocalized form. The 
ability to properly diacritize, or dot, text relies on 
a considerable understanding of the language. 
Undotted Hebrew text contains vastly more 
ambiguities compared to English text. Many 
words can be both understood and pronounced 
differently based on their diacritics, as shown in 
Table 1. Nowadays, these marks are rarely used so 
readers are left to infer the meaning from the 
context, we try to teach a machine to do the same.   
 
Diacritized Vocalization Meaning 
 םָלִּצְבּ Be-tzi-lam In their shade 
 םֶלֶצְבּ Be-tze-lem In one’s image 
 םָלַּצְבּ Btza-lam Their onion 
 םָלַּצַּבּ Ba-tza-lam (i.e. depends) On 
the photographer 
Table 1: four ways to diacritize the same base letters 
leading to four different pronunciations and meaning. 
To compensate for the inherent ambiguity in plain 
Hebrew script, most modern texts use a variation 
called Full script (Nikkud Maleh) instead of the 
standard Partial script (Nikkud Haser). Full script 
uses the letters י and  ו which function like vowels 
in places where it can aid pronunciation. Thus, 
when the diacritical marks are dropped, these 
letters are maintained and so is the vocalization. 
These two coexisting variations present a 
challenge when training since they have slightly 
different rules for dotting. 
It's worth pointing out the use of diacritical marks 
in Hebrew in contrast to other semitic languages. 
Marks in Hebrew are used mostly to determine the 
vocalization of a letter (and the word), and only in 
one case is it used to determine between two 
forms of the same base character. Some pairs of 
marks have vocalization that are almost 
indistinguishable to the modern ear, their 
difference so subtle it was neglected with time 
(i.e. kamatz and patah). So even knowing the 
correct vocalization, it is in most cases hard to 
choose the correct mark, adding to the ambiguity. 
In Arabic, in contrast, many marks distinguish 
between different consonants that have the same 
base character, and the rest determine the 
vocalization. In the case of the latter, each mark 
has a distinct vocalization. 
Hebrew poses another challenge since most of the 
text obtainable today is not dotted, making it a 
challenge to assemble a sizable dataset. Diacritical 
marks are not used in everyday writing, nor in 
formal forms of writing, such as official 
documents or newspapers. These marks are 
mostly used for educating, so while most can read 
dotted text very few can produce it. Religious text 
is mostly dotted but both uses some extra marks 
and uses a form very different to modern text.  
A word’s diacritical marks are strongly linked to 
the context of word in the sentence, and the POS 

  
 
 
tag of the word. Furthermore, when observing the 
sequences of marks, it’s easy to notice that they 
mostly follow certain patterns, usually linked to 
the conjugation or inflection of the word’s base 
form. Luckily, patterns and relations are attributes 
neural networks capture well. This leads us to 
believe that a transformer model should perform 
well on this task, and that good dotting skills 
could be a good indication of a model’s 
understanding of language, and thus, of its ability 
to perform better on other downstream tasks. 
Previous work: 
Early attempts at tackling Hebrew dotting or 
vowel restoration use a probabilistic approach, 
HMMs (Kontorovich, 2001; Gal, 2002). These 
achieved some success but had trouble 
generalizing to unseen data. 
Jumping quite a bit forward, after neural networks 
showed promising results in many fields, some 
attempts to incorporate these is dotting systems 
were made. Dicta’s Nakdan (Shmidman et al., 
2020), argued that in this case machine learned 
models will benefit from the help of explicit 
knowledge of the language. Thus, they developed 
a complex system which includes a first stage of 
morphological analysis (using an LSTM), and a 
second stage which uses expert-conceived tables 
of dotting rules. This model is still today’s SOTA. 
A more recent model, Nakdimon (Gershuni and 
Pinter, 2021) trained a Bi-LSTM to produce a 
dotted sequence directly from the given plain 
sentence, without preliminary stages or the use of 
external resources. While not surpassing the 
SOTA, it showed promising results, thus 
motivating us to further investigate this heading. 
By presenting a comprehensive test set and testing 
against the existing SOTA, Nakdimon provided a 
steppingstone for more to come. 
In this work, we seek to continue this very line by 
harnessing a resource that is now almost 
elementary in every NLP task, pretrained 
language models. We present MenakBERT, a 
transformer-based model that accepts an undotted 
sequence of characters and produces a sequence of 
diacritical marks.  
2 TavBERT – the model’s backbone 
TavBERT (Omri Keren et al., 2022) is a char-
based Bert-style masked language model (Devlin 
et al. 2018). It was pretrained on the OSCAR 
corpus comprising of 3.1B Hebrew words, 
following the same technique as SpanBERT 
(Joshi et al. 2020). The hypothesis at the root of 
the work on TavBERT claimed that a character 
aware tokenization method is more appropriate 
when dealing with morphologically rich languages 
such as Hebrew, in comparison with the more 
common word-pieces approach. Their results 
ended up reasserting the potential of the more 
common sub word tokenization. TavBERT 
performed on par with existing word-pieces based 
models on morophological tasks. But performed 
relatively poor on tasks which require more 
semantic capabilities. Keeping these results in 
mind, we still believe that using a char-based 
PLM as a backbone for our model will show 
better results, for the following reasons. Adding 
diacritical marks is a task applied per-char and 
tokenizing every char independently allows more 
flexibility in inferring sub-word relations, which 
are as important in this case as inter-word 
relations. Also, morphological understanding is 
key in this task, and according to the paper, this 
seems the be TavBERT’s strong side. 
3 MenakBERT 
Following Nakdimon’s approach, we divide 
Hebrew diacritical marks to three categories:  First 
(S) for the dot distinguishing two consonants 
vs sin 
it is used only with this letter. Second (D1) for 
the dot in the center of a letter that in some case 
changes pronunciation of certain letters, and in 
other cases creating a similar affect as an 
emphasis on the letter, or gemination. Third for 
the rest of the marks (N2), used mostly for 
vocalization. 

  
 
 
 
Figure 1: the entire MenakBERT pipeline. 
Character-transformer Dotter: 
As visualized in figure 1, MenakBERT takes as 
input a sequence of undotted characters and 
outputs three sequences of diacritical marks, for 
the three categories mentioned. It uses 
TavBERT’s tokenizer to embed the input and pass 
it through the fine-tuned TavBERT transformer 
model. Next come two Linear layers, with a 
Dropout and activation layers in between. It then 
feeds the output to three distinct linear layers and 
SoftMax to produce three distributions for the 
three categories for every character. Taking the 
argmax of each, produces the three output 
sequences.  
___________ 
1short for Dagesh meaning emphasis in Hebrew. 
2short for Niqqud which is the name for diacritical 
marks in Hebrew. 
Training data: 
Use cases for a dotting model would normally 
apply to modern text, both as an end goal 
(producing dotted text) and as a preliminary stage 
for other downstream tasks. For this reason, 
modern text is key in training such a model. 
Unfortunately, as mentioned before, dotted 
Hebrew text is hard to come by, especially 
modern. Nakdimon carried out impressive work 
creating a diverse dataset of both modern and 
premodern text. The premodern portion contains a 
diverse collection of texts from 12th century 
religious works to 19th century stories   and 
poetry. The modern portion aims to reflect a more 
current form of expression. It contains modern 
books, songs, news and opinion articles, 
Wikipedia pages, judicial texts, and movie 
subtitles. Some of the modern texts were dotted 
using Dicta followed by manual error correction. 
The premodern dataset contains 2.6 million 
Hebrew characters, and the modern dataset 
contains 0.3 million Hebrew characters. 
For the development set we use a dataset with 
only modern text. This will help steer the training 
in the right direction. 
The dataset contains texts using both full script 
and partial script. We apply no preprocessing to 
change this and leave it to the model to understand 
the difference. 
4 Experiments 
In order to properly evaluate our model against 
earlier results we report the same metrics as 
Nakdimon: decision accuracy (DEC), which is 
computed over the entire set of individual possible 
decisions (for the three categories of diacritical 
marks). Character accuracy (CHA) is the portion 
of characters in the text that end up in their 
intended final form. Word accuracy (WOR) is the 
portion of words with no diacritization mistakes. 
Vocalization accuracy (VOC) is the portion of 
words where any dotting errors do not cause 
incorrect pronunciation.  


  
 
 
System DEC CHA WOR VOC 
Snopi 91.14 85.45 74.73 77.17 
Morfix 97.25 95.35 89.43 91.64 
Dicta 98.94 98.23 95.83 95.93 
Nakdimon 97.37 95.41 87.21 89.32 
MenakBERT 98.82 97.95 94.12 95.22 
Table 2: results on the Nakdimon test set 
 
We split the training data into four datasets: 
religious, premodern, early modern, and modern, 
and trained the model by chronological order so as 
to focus the model on the modern form. The texts 
are preprocessed in the same manner as in 
Nakdimon, for persistency reasons, with one 
difference. We choose to split the text to samples 
according to sentence boundaries, whereas 
Nakdimon splits by a set length. Optimization 
uses Adam with a learning rate scheduler with 
warmup. While training, we allow the gradient to 
backpropagate through the entire model, thus fine 
tuning the weights of the PLM TavBERT.. 
Results 
The results shown in table 2 are on the test set 
created by Nakdimon. We compare our results 
against the results reported by Nakdimon of 
several systems. Dicta and Nakdimon are the two 
systems mentioned earlier. Morfix is a system 
developed in 1996 by Professor Jacob Shoike for 
the Center for Educational Technology. Snopy is a 
system developed by Tzvika Berkovich. We can 
clearly see two notable observations. The first is 
that MenakBERT closes most of the gap behind 
Dicta on all four metrics. The second is that in 
both WOR and VOC, where Nakdimon was 
unsuccessful at passing Morfix, MenakBERT 
passes Morfix and closes in on Dicta. 
Error analysis 
Unsurprisingly, in terms of types of mistakes, 
MenakBERT behaves similarly to Nakdimon. Not 
unlike other language models we see that 
MenakBERT learns patterns well. For example, 
conjugations of different verbs that share a pattern 
and often have the same diacritics. A pattern that, 
before dotting, could fit two parts of speech, could 
fool the model. For example, in this case the 
model dots the word as an adjective instead of a 
verb. 
Should be: MenakBERT: 
ןַמְזַּבּ ַעיִגַּðאÎ י ִזוּז ָתּא Î םִא ןַמְזַּבּ ַעיִגַּðאÎ יִזוּז ְתּא Î םִא 
 
In Hebrew the difference between a particular and 
a non-particular noun can be a hidden in the 
diacritics. In some cases, the model didn’t choose 
the correct form, even when it succeeded with 
another noun in the same sentence. For example, 
in the sentence “Dealing with the money and 
property” MenakBERT marked: “Dealing with the 
money and a property”. Or in Hebrew: 
Should be: MenakBERT: 
 שׁוּכְר ָבוּ םיִפָסְכַבּ לוּפּיִט  שׁוּכְר ְבוּ םיִפָסְכַבּ לוּפּיִט 
 
English words and names are not uncommon in 
Hebrew text and reveal another of the model’s 
weak spots. The model dots these words in a way 
that the vocalization has a Hebrew ring, but this 
will lead to a mistake. For example, a name like 
Sherill will be vocalized as Sharil. 
Qualitative evaluation 
We perform a qualitative evaluation by showing 
how the model reacts to certain patterns. We take 
a base form that does not exist in Hebrew ( גלק )
and build a sentence using different inflections of 
that form. We choose the inflections to fit the 
position and role in the sentence, this creates a 
sequence that sounds like a Hebrew sentence but 
complete gibberish. We bring here one example: 
תֹוגיִלְקִבּ תֹוגָלְקַּה תֶא גֵלּיִ ק גֶלֶקַּה 
the model 
dots the words in the form that would fit a true 
word with the corresponding part of speech. This 
raises some interesting questions as to the 
importance of semantics when dotting. Whereas 
the importance of the syntactic structure is clear. 
 
 

  
 
 
5 Development Experiments 
Dotting as masked prediction 
As a first step before fine-tuning the model we 
tried testing if TavBert has any understanding of 
diacritics as a baseline. TavBert was trained as a 
masked model, so we modeled the problem as a 
masked prediction problem. When using UTF the 
diacritical marks appear as characters after the 
base character. TavBERT does not have a NULL 
character in its vocabulary, so it always outputs a 
character per mask. This makes it challenging to 
evaluate its performance, since allowing it to 
output marks wherever it decides by adding masks 
after every letter, forces the model to make 
mistakes. To address this, we  give the model an 
easier challenge by replacing the real marks with 
masks. We do a qualitative evaluation, because a 
quotative one would yield no baseline for 
comparison.  
When all marks were stripped from the sentence, 
the model behaved very poorly, and in most cases 
did not even attempt to output diacritical marks. 
Next, only marks from some words were 
removed, and replaced with masks. In this case the 
model did use diacritical marks to fill in the masks 
but with low success. One interesting observation 
is that when the word is a simple and common one 
that is not conjugated or inflected, the model 
usually gets it right! For example: 
Should be: 
 רַחאְַלםַסְרוּפּ ןֹושׁאִרָה ורָקְחֶמֶּשׁ  
Output: 
 ֹורְקָחַמֶּשׁ רַחאְַל םַסְרוּפּ ןֹושׁאִרָה  
 
In the above example the first two words’ marks 
were masked. The first word, meaning after, was 
dotted correct. And the second, meaning that his 
research, was dotted wrong.  
Hyper parameter tuning 
We experimented with the following 
hyperparameters using a coarse grid search 
followed by a fine one: 
Dropout: Fiddling around with the dropout of the 
attention layers in the TavBERT portion of the 
model seemed to only hinder learning so we left it 
at 0.1 which was used in the TavBERT paper. The 
last dropout layer before the classification layers 
maxed at 0.3. 
Last hidden layer size: We experimented with 
different sizes from 896 to 2048 and found that 
increasing the layer size helped, so we used 2048. 
Learning rate: we used a learning rate scheduler 
with warmup. we set the warmup to 0.2 of the 
training steps. The initial learning rate was set to 
the default 0. We found a max learning rate of 1e-
5 to give the best results.  
Weights: Looking at initial results we realized that 
MenakBERT makes on average more mistakes on 
the second category dagesh (emphasis dot). We 
tried countering this using weighted cross-entropy.  
We scanned the entire training corpus to 
determine the distribution of the different classes 
and chose weights inverse to this distribution in 
order to focus the model on the rare marks. We 
tried this once again using the distribution only in 
the modern segment of the data. Both approaches 
showed no improvement and, in some cases, also 
interfered with training. 
Bible Bias 
The bible provides a very large, dotted source. To 
our dismay, we noticed that when using it for 
training, we get worse results. We believe that 
since it becomes a great portion of the data, the 
model becomes biased towards certain patterns. 
And as we mentioned the bible doesn’t conform to 
the modern dotting scheme. For this reason, we 
chose not to train on the bible. We bring one 
amusing example. In the sentence “in the ditch a 
whole platoon was under fire”, the word ‘whole’ 
(shlema) is spelled the same as ‘(King) Solomon’ 
(shlomo), and even though the context is clear, the 
model still prefers dotting the word as Solomon.  
Sequential learning 
Another observation addresses the order of 
training. We tried training over the entire training 

  
 
 
set as a whole vs. separating into four sets by 
chronological order and training sequentially, 
keeping the most modern text last. The second 
approach led to much better results when tested on 
modern texts. This notion reflects the idea of how 
the language evolves over time, letting the model 
learn from texts from all periods but focus on the 
most recent texts. 
6 Dotting as prior for POS tagging 
In Dicta’s Nakdan, part of speech tagging was 
used as a first stage for diacritizing. We propose 
the opposite, to use knowledge in diacritizing for 
POS tagging. After fine-tuning MenakBERT for 
dotting on our dataset, we take out the weights of 
the fine-tuned TavBERT model and evaluate it 
against the original TavBERT model. We use the 
same method as in the TavBERT paper: We fine 
tune a token-classification head on top of each 
model’s final encoder layer. The dataset used is 
the Hebrew treebank of the Universal 
Dependencies v2.2 dataset from the CoNLL-18 
UD shared task (Sade et al., 2018).  
Results 
Figure 2 shows the accuracy per epoch for both 
the fine-tuned TavBERT and the original. We can 
see that the fine-tuned TavBERT enjoys a 
substantial head start in terms of accuracy, after 
only one epoch of training it scores 0.558 
compared to the original 0.393. But a mere two 
epochs later the two models converge. After this 
point the two models even switch places for a 
while until completely converging. When 
observing F1 score, even the initial advantage 
vanishes. 
It seems that Fine tuning the model for dotting did 
not provide the benefit we were hoping for. 
 
 
 
  
Figure 2 
7 Conclusion 
It is the general opinion amongst the NLP 
community that rule-based machines are ‘out’ and 
deep neural networks are ‘in’, but here we stumble 
across a case where the SOTA method for dotting 
text is still dominated by a hybrid technique using 
both an LSTM type architecture and a rule-based 
procedure. We believe that as in other fields of 
NLP this is temporary. Our results show that by 
using a PLM trained on Hebrew text we can 
narrowly close the gap in accuracy on 
Nakdimon’s dataset. Furthermore, we think that 
this, still existing gap, is a testament to the 
scarcity of resources in Hebrew NLP. Specifically, 
in our case, a lack of modern diacritized text. This 
paper aims to be another piece in the growing 
foundations of the Hebrew NLP community and 
as further motivation to continue creating larger, 
more comprehensive and modern, datasets and 
language models.   
8 Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Elazar Gershuni of 
Nakdimon for his priceless advice and for 
providing us with details about working with 
Nakdimon’s model and dataset. We would like to 
thank Omri Keren for giving us access to his 
Hebrew PLM “TavBERT” which grew to be the 
backbone of MenakBERT. 
 
 


  
 
 
9 References 
Ya’akov Gal. 2002. An HMM approach to vowel 
restoration in Arabic and Hebrew. In Proceedings 
of the ACL-02 Workshop on Computational 
Approaches to Semitic Languages, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Leonid Kontorovich. 2001. Problems in semitic 
nlp: Hebrew vocalization using hmms. 
Avi Shmidman, Shaltiel Shmidman, Moshe 
Koppel, and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Nakdan: 
Professional Hebrew diacritizer. In Proceedings of 
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: System 
Demonstrations, pages 197– 203, Online. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Elazar Gershuni, Yuval Pinter. 2021. Restoring 
Hebrew Diacritics Without a Dictionary 
(Nakdimon). 
Omri Keren, Tal Avinari, Reut Tsarfaty, Omer 
Levy. 2022. Breaking Character: Are Subwords 
Good Enough for MRLs After All? 
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, 
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of 
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language 
Understanding. 
Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. 
Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, Omer Levy. 2020. 
SpanBERT: Improving Pre-training by 
Representing and Predicting Spans. 
Shoval Sade, Amit Seker, and Reut Tsarfaty. 
2018. The Hebrew Universal Dependency 
treebank: Past present and future 
Amit Seker and Reut Tsarfaty. 2020. A pointer 
network architecture for joint morphological 
segmentation and tagging 